--- page 1 ---
1
Pegged Exchange Rate Systems in
Macau and Hong Kong*
Robert Haney Scott
University of Macau, Macau
and California State University, Chico, U.S.A.
Macau pegs its currency, the pataca, to the Hong Kong dollar, which in turn
is pegged to the U.S. dollar. This type of pegging order is unique in the annals
of international financial arrangements. This article analyzes the structure of
the pegged exchange rate systems in Macau and Hong Kong and discusses the
financial and economic implications of these systems for the two territories
(JEL F33, G15).
Key words: currency board system, currency substitution, pegged exchange
rates, seigniorage.
I. Introduction
Following the speculative attack on the Hong Kong dollar (HK dollar)
in September of 1983, the Hong Kong government pegged the HK
dollar to the U.S. dollar at 7.80/1.00, which has remained the same since
then.1 This peg is a currency-based peg in that the exchange of HK
dollar currency for U.S. dollar currency takes place only between banks
and the government’s Exchange Fund. Because of processing costs, the
banks charge a commission fee of 1 percent on each transaction initiated
by non-bank customers. Therefore, the exchange rate for bank deposit
* A portion of this article was presented at the symposium on Macau and Its Neighbors
in Transition held at the University of Macau on March 18–19, 1996. The author would like
to thank Ms. Winnie Kuan for valuable assistance in the preparation of the article and the
referees and managing editor of the MFJ for helpful comments.
1. Before the peg, there existed a government ordinance in Hong Kong called the
Prohibition of Circulation of Foreign Currency to help strengthen the circulation of the HK
dollar. The ordinance was abolished a few years after the establishment of the pegged system.
(Multinational Finance Journal, 1997, vol. 1, no. 2, pp. 153–168)
© by Multinational Finance Society, a nonprofit corporation. All rights reserved.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2631567

--- page 2 ---
154 Multinational Finance Journal
money varies by 1 percent above and below the above pegged rate. The
peg has made the HK dollar widely acceptable in foreign trade.
However, the HK dollar has not been as widely acceptable in
international trade as the U.S. dollar.
Macau pegs the pataca to the HK dollar at 1.03/1.00, with an
effective 1 percent range above and below. In 1993, the government of
Macau passed an ordinance requiring local businesses to list the prices
of goods in patacas, probably because of fear that the HK dollar might
displace the pataca in Macau. Nevertheless, the government does not
discourage the circulation of HK dollars and other foreign currency in
Macau. Bank automatic teller machines (ATMs) in Macau dispense
bank notes in either of the two currencies.2
Having one currency pegged to another currency, which in turn is
pegged to the U.S. dollar, is unique in the annals of international
financial arrangements. Moreover, the fact that the HK dollar is widely
used in local trade in Hong Kong raises a question of whether a
currency with less intrinsic value (HK dollar) is driving out a currency
with the higher intrinsic value (US dollar) that can easily be sent out of
the country for deposit as “bullion” in foreign banks, as anticipated by
Gresham’s Law.
Gresham’s Law, named after Sir Thomas Gresham, states that bad
money drives out good money. A definition for Gresham’s Law is found
in Webster’s Ninth New Collegiate Dictionary :“ . . . when two coins are
equal in debt-paying value but unequal in intrinsic value, the one having
the lesser intrinsic value tends to remain in circulation and the other
tends to be hoarded or exported as bullion.” The reference pertains to
a bimetallic currency system and the term intrinsic value clearly refers
2. Macau, established in 1557, is a Portuguese-administered territory across the Pearl
River Estuary to the west of Hong Kong. It is expected to become a special administrative
region of China on December 20, 1999. For nearly 300 years, its harbors kept Macau one
of the richest cities in the world. However, when the British developed Hong Kong, with its
deep water port, Macau’s predominance faded. It is now a center for gambling. Each
weekend, thousands of Hong Kong gamblers journey by ferry or helicopter across 60
kilometers of the Pearl River Estuary to gamble in Macau’s casinos. Macau is one of the
smallest modern economies in the world to maintain its own currency. Its population is about
half a million and its land area is less than ten square miles. In contrast, Hong Kong’s
population is over 6 million and its land area is about 400 square miles. Both territories have
large areas of steep rocky hillsides that are not suitable for cultivation or habitation. China
maintains a special economic zone to the north of Hong Kong, called Shenzhen, and one to
the north of Macau called Zhuhai. Both zones have grown rapidly during the past 15 years.
There is no sales tax in Macau but, as in Hong Kong, there is a tax on business profits,
gambling profits, and salaries above a certain level.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2631567

--- page 3 ---
Pegged Exchange Rates 155
to the market value for metals set in international trade.
The purpose of this article is to analyze the structure of the pegged
exchange rate systems in Macau and Hong Kong and discuss the
financial and economic implications of these systems for the two
territories. The article proceeds as follows: Section II presents a brief
literature review on currency substitution and presents statistics for
Hong Kong and Macau. Section III discusses the mechanism and types
of seigniorage earned by the governments in Macau and Hong Kong.
Section IV elaborates on the notion of intrinsic value of paper money.
Section V explores the financial and economic implications of the
pegged exchange rate systems in the two territories. Section VI presents
a brief summary and concluding remarks.
II. Currency Substitution
A. Literature Review
The early literature on currency substitution revolves around the issue
of the substitution of hard currencies for weak and volatile currencies
of smaller countries. Aliber (1967) investigates the relation between
changes in asset preferences and the demand for international reserves.
He concludes that when prices of reserve assets are pegged, some
mechanism to adjust their relative supply and demand is necessary to
prevent hoarding of one asset or the other. McKinnon (1982) examines
the implications of major currency substitution for the stability of
money demand functions and recommends that the Federal Reserve
should, in the interest of monetary stability, discontinue its policy of
passively sterilizing the domestic monetary impact of foreign official
interventions. Aiyagari (1989) explores the impact of asymmetric
information on currency substitution. He concludes that higher quality
assets are hoarded for future consumption, whereas lower quality assets
are exchanged for current consumption. Thus, bad assets circulate
faster than good assets.3 Miles (1978) suggests that the elasticity of
substitution between currencies should be the variable of focus in
empirical studies of currency substitution rather than the interest
elasticity of demand. Calvo and Rodriguez (1978), using a rational
expectations model of exchange rate determination, find that an increase
in the money supply in a small open economy leads to an instantaneous
3. See Aiyagari (1989), p. 692.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2631567

--- page 4 ---
156 Multinational Finance Journal
deterioration of the real exchange rate.
Craig (1997) provides a brief history of several dual currency
regimes that existed in America from colonial to modern times. He
suggests that perhaps smart-card money will spread to become the
substitute currency in countries around the world.
Jao (1992) documents a significant amount of currency substitution
as a result of the speculation against the HK dollar that occurred a
month prior to the installation of the pegged exchange rate system in
Hong Kong. He finds that in a pegged exchange rate system where
adequate reserves are held, exchange rate volatility due to speculation
has a minor effect on currency substitution. Currency substitution takes
place because of concerns over the intrinsic value of the currency.
B. Currency Substitution in Hong Kong and Macau
To ensure clarity, it is important to define the terms currency in
circulation, money, and currency substitution. Currency in circulation
includes domestic and foreign coins and notes. Money, as measured by
M , includes currency in circulation and demand deposits in domestic
1
banks, whereas M also includes time deposits. The deposits can be in
2
domestic or foreign currency. The term currency substitution refers to
the case where money in one country includes foreign coins, notes, and
deposits. Thus, currency substitution refers to the use of another
country’s currency. In the discussion that follows, the term currency is
used loosely to include coins, notes, and deposits.
Panel A of table 1 presents estimates of the composition of M and
1
M money in Hong Kong during the period 1987–96. The results show
2
that, on average, HK$ and Fx make up 90 percent and 10 percent of M ,
1
respectively. Except for the years 1990 and 1991, the proportions of
HK$ and Fx to M remain close to their average figures. The results for
1
M are, however, different. The last two columns of panel A, show that
2
the HK$ and Fx make up about 45 and 55 percent of M , respectively.
2
This is because Hong Kong is an international banking center, thus, a
large percentage of foreign currency (Fx) is held in the form of time
deposits. The figures for Fx indicate that there is a relative increase in
currency substitution in Hong Kong during the period 1987–90 and a
relative decrease in currency substitution thereafter.
Panel B of table 1 presents estimates of the composition of M and
1
M money in Macau in terms of patacas (Ptc), HK$, and Fx for the
2
period 1985–96.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2631567

--- page 5 ---
Pegged Exchange Rates 157
TABLE 1. Composition of M and M in Hong Kong and Macau
1 2
A. Hong Kong
Year HK$/M Fx/M HK$/M Fx/M
1 1 2 2
1987 90.1 9.9 45.9 54.1
1988 89.2 10.8 43.1 56.9
1989 89.8 10.2 40.9 59.1
1990 85.4 14.6 39.0 61.0
1991 87.0 13.0 43.5 56.5
1992 89.7 10.3 44.0 56.0
1993 89.8 10.2 48.3 51.7
1994 90.6 9.4 49.7 50.3
1995 90.1 9.9 53.4 46.6
1996 91.2 8.8 58.4 41.6
B. Macau
Year Ptc/M HK$/M Fx/M Ptc/M HK$/M Fx/M
1 1 1 2 2 2
1985 44.2 51.7 4.1 26.6 59.9 13.5
1986 44.3 50.0 5.6 25.7 54.2 20.2
1987 37.3 54.0 8.7 22.6 51.5 25.9
1998 38.9 48.5 12.6 19.1 56.3 24.6
1989 40.5 49.5 10.0 20.9 55.2 23.9
1990 35.8 47.3 16.9 22.7 49.0 28.3
1991 27.6 59.2 13.2 22.8 51.1 26.1
1992 28.8 57.3 13.9 23.9 50.8 25.3
1993 31.5 53.2 15.3 27.8 48.0 24.2
1994 35.8 53.1 11.1 27.1 55.5 17.4
1995 38.5 51.3 10.2 29.0 56.3 14.7
1996 42.5 47.6 9.9 30.5 54.9 14.5
Note: Figures are expressed as percentages. HK$ is for HK dollars, Ptc is for patacas,
and Fx is for foreign currency. The M definition of money includes currency in circulation
1
and demand deposits. The M definition includes M and time deposits. Data were collected
2 1
from The Hong Kong Digest of Statistics and AMCM Annual Reports.
The results show that, on average, the Ptc, HK$, and Fx make up 35, 54,
and 11 percent of M , respectively. Thus, the HK$ is the dominant
1
component of M money in Macau. Moreover, the annual figures show
1
that the composition of money in Macau is not stable over time.
Specifically, during the last two years, 1995 and 1996, the share of HK$
and Fx dropped below their average values of 54 and 11 percent and the
share of the Ptc increased above its average value of 34 percent. The
latter suggest a recent decrease of currency substitution in Macau. The
last three columns of panel B show that, on average, HK$ and Fx make
up 25, 54, and 21 percent of M , respectively. As in the case of M
2 1
money, the HK$ is the dominant component of M money. Interestingly,
2
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2631567

--- page 6 ---
158 Multinational Finance Journal
the HK$ holds its share during the recent years. This is because people
in Macau use more Ptc and less HK$ in everyday transactions, but they
hold more HK$ and Fx in banks in the form of time deposits.
Currency substitution has important implications for earning
seigniorage, which ranks as a principal inducement to governments to
restrict the circulation of a foreign currency in their economies and stop
the flow of seigniorage to other countries.
III. Seigniorage in Macau and Hong Kong
A. Types of Seigniorage
Seigniorage is a type of revenue governments earn because of their
monopoly over the production of coins and notes. Many centuries ago,
governments took over the minting of coins. Individuals with precious
metal could take it to the government, and, for a fee called brassage, the
government’s mint would stamp a coin out of the metal so the individual
could use the coin in commerce. Initially, the metal was stamped to
verify its gold or silver content. But later governments mixed gold or
silver with metal of lower value to create a “token” coin in contrast to
full-bodied coin. This led to the creation of paper money.
One can distinguish between two types of returns to government
from the issue of currency. One is seigniorage and the other is inflation
tax. Although some analysts refer to both as seigniorage, there are
important differences between the two.4
Barro and Stevenson (1997) report that the cost of printing paper
notes in the U.S. is about four cents. Thus, the U.S. government makes
a profit of 96 cents when it spends a newly printed dollar bill and a
profit of $99.96 when it spends a newly printed $100 bill. This profit
may be called seigniorage. By issuing its own currency and enforcing
laws against counterfeiting, a government can literally make money to use
for expenditures. Seigniorage also takes the form of the interest earned
on the outstanding amount of domestic currency. This is the principal
form of seigniorage for the governments of Macau and Hong Kong.
Inflation is usually the result of excess issue of money, mainly for
the purpose of financing government expenditure. The government’s
purchases of goods and services leave fewer resources for the private
4. For a complete explanation of the origins of seigniorage and the way it is earned by
governments and by banks that issue money, see Scott (1995), pp. 96–102.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2631567

--- page 7 ---
Pegged Exchange Rates 159
sector. With more money and fewer resources, the result is higher
prices and inflation. Essentially, inflation is a form of indirect income
tax, since it causes a decline in the purchasing power of the public’s
income. Thus, by issuing excess money, the government profits at the
expense of the consuming public. In addition, inflation often leads to
increases in nominal income and government tax revenue.
Although both the inflation tax and seigniorage are significant forms
of government revenue, this article focuses on the economic structure
and measurement of seigniorage.
B. Currency Board System and Seigniorage
Under the Currency Board System, the issue of coins and notes by a
bank must be backed with the equivalent amount of foreign exchange
or interest-earning (foreign) assets. These assets permit the government
to earn interest (seigniorage) on the outstanding amount of currency in
circulation. They also act as collateral to the amount of currency issued.
If Hong Kong, for example, were to employ the U.S. dollar as its
medium of exchange, the seigniorage would be lost to America. That
is why it is important for the Hong Kong government to see that U.S.
currency does not replace the HK dollar in everyday transactions.
Similarly, if the Macau government wishes to raise seigniorage revenue
from its issue of the pataca, then the pataca rather than the HK dollar
should circulate more widely in Macau.
C. Economic Framework of Seigniorage
Traditionally, the Banco Nacional Ultramarino (BNU) has acted as the
banker for the government of Macau and issued its currency.5 In
October 1996, however, the local branch of the Bank of China (BOC)
also began issuing currency for Macau. The Authority for Money and
Foreign Exchange of Macau (AMCM) is the government agency
charged with the supervision of banks and the management of the
monetary system and foreign exchange reserves in Macau.6
To issue new pataca notes, the BNU or BOC must obtain certificates
of indebtedness (CI’s) from the AMCM. For this purpose, the banks
must deposit the equivalent amount of foreign exchange or interest
earning assets—denominated in U.S. or HK dollars—with the AMCM.
Neither the BNU nor BOC can earn interest on the CI’s held. The
5. BNU is a bank based in Portugal but with offices in Macau.
6. The Portuguese name for AMCM is Autoridade Monetaria e Cambial de Macau.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2631567

--- page 8 ---
160 Multinational Finance Journal
foreign exchange deposits (henceforth called reserves) serve as backing
for the amount of newly issued notes and they are used by AMCM to
earn seigniorage for the government.
As the amount of pataca notes in the economy expands, the foreign
exchange reserves held by the AMCM expand. Currently, the foreign
exchange reserves exceed the amount outstanding of pataca notes, when
evaluated at the pegged exchange rate of 1.03 Ptc/HK$. This is because
the government is letting the earnings from seigniorage accumulate
rather than spending them or cutting taxes. Thus, over the years the
volume of reserves has been enlarged by the compounding of interest
returns. Unfortunately, the AMCM chooses not to publish the volume
of reserves it holds nor the yields earned on these reserves. However,
the general policy of the AMCM is to invest in low-risk assets.7
The note-issuing banks in Hong Kong are the Hongkong Shanghai
Banking Corporation, the Standard Chartered Bank, and the local
branch of the BOC. As in the case of Macau, the issue of notes must be
backed with assets deposited by the Exchange Fund (EF). The
relationship between the EF and the local banks in Hong Kong,
regarding the issue of new notes, is similar to that of AMCM and local
banks in Macau.
The EF, established by the former British colonial government of
Hong Kong, is charged with the management of foreign exchange
reserves under the currency board system.8 Currently, the EF manages
between 70 and 80 billion U.S. dollars in foreign exchange reserves.
These reserves also include government budget surpluses invested by
the EF in foreign currency denominated assets. Note that the precise
amount of reserves held by the EF is difficult to know because it
fluctuates with global market conditions. Hong Kong’s foreign
exchange reserves are the fifth largest in the world.
In early 1997, the EF reported that the amount of HK notes in
circulation was about 86 billion HK$, or 11 billion US$ when evaluated
at the pegged exchange rate of 7.8 HK$/US$. Thus, the accumulated
foreign exchange reserves held by the Hong Kong government are about
seven times larger than the reserves needed to back the outstanding
7. In a lecture presented at the University of Macau in 1997, a spokesman for the
AMCM, who wished to remain anonymous, said that the AMCM had accumulated foreign
exchange reserves of 2.3 billion U.S. dollars by mid-1997. On a per-capita basis, Macau
might claim a rank of seventh in the world in terms of foreign exchange reserves.
8. Specifically, the Exchange Fund is managed by the Hong Kong Monetary Authority
(HKMA), established in 1993. The HKMA is overseen by the Monetary Affairs branch of
the government of Hong Kong.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2631567

--- page 9 ---
Pegged Exchange Rates 161
amount of Hong Kong notes.
D. Seigniorage on Exported U.S. and HK Dollars
Seigniorage represents transfer of interest from those holding the
currency (coins and notes) to the government issuing the currency.
Therefore, in the case of currency substitution—where residents in the
home country hold foreign currency—seigniorage flows from the home
country to the country issuing the currency. Thus, currency exported
from one country for use in another country earns foreign exchange
(purchasing power) as well as seigniorage for the exporting country.
The major exporter of foreign currency in the world is the U.S.
About $240 billion (60 percent) of the $400 billion outstanding U.S.
notes circulates in foreign countries. Every dollar of this non-interest-
bearing debt represents a dollar less that the U.S. government must
borrow from the securities markets. The U.S. Treasury pays roughly 5
percent interest to borrow funds. Thus, the total savings for the U.S.
government from the exports of U.S. dollars is about $12 billion each
year. Hanke (1995) points out that this indirect export of dollars is the
most profitable export the U.S. has.9
Hong Kong exports its currency into Macau and the adjacent
Guangdong Province of China. Greenwood (1990) and Ogus (1992)
estimate the proportion of Hong Kong currency circulating in Guangdong
Province and find that the percentage was about 18 percent during 1990
and 30 percent during 1995.10 The latter figure amounts to about HK$21.9
billion of the HK$73 billion in circulation during 1995. The relevant
estimate for Macau during 1991 was HK$2 billion.11 Thus, a 5 percent
interest would produce HK$1.095 billion seigniorage for the Hong Kong
government, coming directly from the persons living in Guangdong
Province, and HK$100 million coming from Macau. The latter figure
amounts to about 200 patacas per year for each person living in Macau.
E. Seigniorage on Bank Deposits
In countries where there are binding legal reserve requirements, banks
must maintain non-interest-earning reserves. But, banks in Hong Kong
9. See Hanke (1995), p. 126.
10.See Greenwood (1990) pp. 37–44. Revisions of the original estimates by Greenwood
are also presented in Ogus (1992), pp. 34–35.
11.This estimate was based on a simple ratio of HK dollar demand deposits to pataca
demand deposits, which was about 2.3 at the time.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2631567

--- page 10 ---
162 Multinational Finance Journal
follow the UK system which only requires banks to hold liquidity
reserves, usually held in interest-earning securities. In Macau there is
a 3 percent legal reserve requirement on demand deposits, which must
be held with the AMCM. Banks in Hong Kong and Macau generate
part of the money supply in the form of demand deposits through the
money multiplier mechanism. Banks making loans in the local currency
realize interest earnings equal to the difference between the interest
received from the loans and the interest paid on checking accounts and
other deposits.
Macau banks make more loans in HK dollars than they do in
patacas, although their deposit base in patacas is quite large. To help
the banks utilize their pataca surpluses, the AMCM began issuing
monetary bills that banks can buy and earn interest on. By buying or
selling monetary bills, the AMCM is in a position to affect the supply
of patacas in Macau.
Liquidity for the banking sector is maintained through the monetary
bills market and not through direct injections of liquidity. Since there
are no financial markets in Macau, the monetary bills are usually sold
among banks. The AMCM is charged with the responsibility of acting
as a buyer of last resort for the bills. The bills are considered to be risk-
free instruments in Macau. Thus they provide a benchmark interest rate
for the economy. Note that the monetary bills operations provide the
foundation for the development of markets for other money market
instruments in Macau.
IV. Intrinsic Value of Paper Money
The distinction between “bad” and “good” for paper money is not as
clear as that of precious metal coins. In the case of coins, the
international markets for gold and silver bullion determine the intrinsic
value of money, relative to that of another country.
Every commercial transaction of goods and services involves a buyer
and a seller. The buyer pays money to the seller in exchange for the
goods and services received. People in Macau consider the HK dollar
to be of higher intrinsic value than the pataca. However, because the
pataca is Macau’s tender currency, the sellers must accept it as the
payment, regardless of its intrinsic value. The buyers, on the other
hand, will tender their “bad” patacas to the seller and hold on to their
“good” HK dollars usually in the form of time deposits.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2631567

--- page 11 ---
Pegged Exchange Rates 163
The HK dollar has certain intrinsic qualities that the pataca does not
have. It is used not only in Hong Kong, but also in Guangdong Province
of China, and it is accepted nearly everywhere in the Asian Pacific
region. As economic development in Macau progresses, the pataca may
also become more acceptable to people in China and other neighboring
countries. Nevertheless, the government of Macau can make the pataca
more acceptable to people in Macau by permitting the casinos and
exporters to pay taxes in patacas, rather than requiring them to pay their
taxes in HK dollars or other foreign currency.12 Moreover, pegging the
pataca to the Hong Kong dollar at a rate of one—i.e., to have the same
face value as the HK dollar—will make the pataca a closer substitute for
the HK dollar.
V. Economic Consequences of Pegged Exchange Rates
In September of 1983, a speculative attack drove the exchange rate
between the HK dollar and the U.S. dollar from five to nine. The
government of Hong Kong had no tools to control the money supply and
stabilize the value of its currency. It could have asked the Hongkong
Shanghai Banking Corporation to act as a central bank, but chose not to
do so. Instead, in October of 1983, the Hong Kong government pegged
the HK dollar to the U.S. dollar at the rate of 7.8; the fundamentals were
suggesting a rate close to six.
At the time of the peg, the U.S. dollar was very strong in the foreign
exchange markets because of the high interest rates in the U.S. and the
anti-inflation measures taken by the Federal Reserve. Soon after the
peg, the inflation and interest rates in the U.S. started to decline. To
support the pegged rate of 7.8, the authorities in Hong Kong were
forced to hold local interest rates close to U.S. interest rates. The
combined forces of the undervalued HK dollar and falling interest rates
resulted in a booming inflationary economy in Hong Kong.
Hong Kong has a legal banking cartel, the Hong Kong Association
of Banks, which exercises considerable influence on domestic deposit
and lending rates. Initially, the cartel did not support the pegged
exchange rate system. But, soon after, it gave strong support to the
12.The government of Macau collects taxes from the casinos in HK dollars, partly
because tourists coming from Hong Kong use HK dollars in gambling. Also, when Macau
exporters earn foreign exchange they are required to pay their taxes in foreign exchange.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2631567

--- page 12 ---
164 Multinational Finance Journal
pegged system because it provided a key to large profit positions for the
banks. Specifically, banks in the cartel could set deposit rates in the
range of 2–4 percent and lending rates in the range of 10–12 percent.
With inflation ranging between 8–10 percent, the banks could earn
positive real returns continuously at the expense of the public, which
suffered negative real returns.
Economists repeatedly warned the government that the pegged
exchange rate system left no weapon to use against inflation. The high
inflation rates and low interest rates on deposits provided a strong
incentive to the public to invest in real estate property. As inflation
continued, real estate prices rose rapidly. The pegged fixed exchange
rate guaranteed that real estate could always sell for more U.S. dollars,
thus creating conditions of continuous inflation.
Because the peg kept the HK dollar undervalued, on several
occasions speculators sold U.S. dollars and bought HK dollars. Many
times these HK dollars were placed into bank deposits in Hong Kong,
earning close to zero interest. The EF was frightened by these
speculative moves and obtained discretionary authority from the HK
government to impose a tax on large deposits, in case it needed this
power to make their effective yield negative. The EF did not find it
necessary to use its authority to impose tax, but provisions for taxing
deposits is still in place.
Hong Kong authorities held back market pressures for a rise in the
value of HK dollars. Exports remained inexpensive to foreigners, but
imports — especially those from the U.S. — remained expensive. Thus,
local exporters received less for their products and consumers paid more
for imported products than they would have if the HK dollar had been
permitted to rise in value.
Fischer (1982) states that the inflation rate in a country that ties its
currency to the currency of a major trading partner will converge to the
inflation rate in the partner country. In the case of Hong Kong, the
convergence was very slow. One reason for this may be that Hong
Kong businesses shifted production to China to take advantage of low
wage rates there to maintain exports even as local inflation was leading
slowly to an overvalued HK dollar. Another reason for the slow
convergence could be that productivity increased.
Inflation in Hong Kong had finally made the HK dollar overvalued.
As a result, on October 23–24, 1997, the Hong Kong stock market
plunged by more than 25 percent. The latter triggered negative waves
to the New York and other major international stock markets. These
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2631567

--- page 13 ---
Pegged Exchange Rates 165
markets, however, recovered quickly, because there was no reason for
large stock markets to be affected by a relatively small local market
such as Hong Kong’s.
Hong Kong’s market and economy have finally responded to
Fischer’s forces of adjustment that promise to bring on significantly
lower rates of inflation. To sustain the peg and keep the HK dollar from
being overvalued, inflation in Hong Kong must eventually drop to about
2 percent from its current rate of 7 percent. Such a drop will require
difficult adjustments in the real economy, especially in the highly
overvalued real estate sector.
Geoffrey Tootell (1992), using cointegration analysis, finds that
inflation rates do not converge even in major metropolitan areas within
the U.S. This finding raises a serious question of whether inflation rates
can converge between Hong Kong and the U.S. in light of the fact that
the banking cartel in Hong Kong finds high inflation profitable.
Nevertheless, in the long run, either inflation rates must converge or the
exchange rate peg must adjust.
Similarly, in Macau, people have invested their holding of patacas
into real estate in the form of flats in high-rise buildings. In Macau
there are currently 60,000 new apartments in about 300 to 400 empty
buildings. The amount of housing available is sufficient to provide
living space for a 50-percent increase in its population. Unfortunately,
if the apartments were to fill up, there would not be sufficient road
space, schools, water, and so forth, to provide for the occupants. This
misallocation of investment resources is the result of the pegged
exchange rate system.
Whenever concerns were expressed about the pegged exchange rate
system and the problem of inflation, officials in Hong Kong argued that
the pegged system was necessary for “stability” because of the
upcoming turnover of Hong Kong to China in July of 1997. After the
turnover, many people claimed that the pegged exchange rate system
was successful in providing stability.
The pegged exchange rate system in Hong Kong stabilized the trade
with the U.S., which accounts for about 30 percent of the total trade,
and, perhaps, relative stability in the trade with other countries.
However, the pegged system has produced higher inflation and
misallocation of resources, especially in the real estate sector. Hong
Kong’s overheated real estate sector recently triggered government
intervention in the mortgage market.
The three principal macroeconomic variables that act as cushions for
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2631567

--- page 14 ---
166 Multinational Finance Journal
an economy subjected to intermittent shocks are exchange rates, interest
rates, and the rate of inflation. When exchange rates are pegged,
interest rates must be kept in line with the host country’s interest rates
to avoid arbitrage. With no adjustment possible in the exchange rates
and interest rates, adjustments toward longer-run equilibrium can only
come about through swings in the rate of inflation. It might have been
better to have the cushion provided by modest instability in flexible
exchange rates, interest rates that would fluctuate in response to changes
in the climate for investment, and minor variation in price levels, so that
each of the three macroeconomic variables could do its work of partially
cushioning the adverse effects of shocks to the system. All prices in a
free market economy need to adjust to market forces if the economy is
to enjoy true stability. Rigid exchange rates simply do not provide
stability, as the case of Hong Kong today so aptly illustrates.
VI. Summary and Conclusions
This article began with a description of the unique currency system in
Macau. The HK dollar is pegged to the U.S. dollar at 7.8 and the pataca
is pegged to the HK dollar at a 1.03. The pataca is viewed as having
less intrinsic value than the HK dollar because it is less acceptable in
regional trade just as the HK dollar is less acceptable than the U.S.
dollar in international trade. Thus, buyers of goods in Macau offer
patacas and hold onto or export their HK dollars, and buyers of goods
in Hong Kong offer HK dollars and hold onto or export U.S. dollars, as
“dictated” by Gresham’s Law.
Despite the pataca being less valuable than the Hong Kong dollar,
a large portion of the circulating currency in Macau consists of Hong
Kong dollars. The government can make the pataca more acceptable to
people in Macau by permitting the casinos and exporters to pay taxes in
patacas, rather than requiring them to pay their taxes in HK dollars or
other foreign currency. Moreover, pegging the pataca to the Hong Kong
dollar at a rate of one will make the pataca more acceptable in trade.
Wider circulation of pataca will result in additional seigniorage for the
government of Macau.
The pegged exchange rate system had left the HK dollar undervalued
and, as a result, the economy had boomed. Interest rates had to be kept
close to U.S. interest rates to avoid arbitrage. The absence of monetary
tools to control inflation in conjunction with the booming economy led
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2631567

--- page 15 ---
Pegged Exchange Rates 167
to steady inflation. The high inflation rates and low interest rates on
deposits provided a strong incentive to the public to invest in real estate.
As inflation continued, real estate prices rose rapidly.
Finally, by November 1997, Hong Kong prices had risen high
enough to make its currency overvalued. The Hong Kong monetary
authorities ware forced to intervene in the interbank market and
purchase large volumes of HK dollars in defense against speculative
attacks on its pegged rate system.
Macau’s economy has suffered similar problems. Builders have
built an excess number of apartments in tiny Macau and they are still
building more apartments at a greater rate.
Government interference in the setting of prices tends to weaken the
efficient operation of an exchange economy. This is especially true in
the case of foreign exchange markets. Political reality indicates that
governments will always be under pressure to interfere with the price of
foreign exchange. But pegged exchange rates do not guarantee long-
term domestic economic stability even when the peg itself is rigidly
maintained.
References
Aliber, R. Z. 1967. Gresham’s Law, asset preferences, and the demand for
international reserves. Quarterly Journal of Economics 81: 628–638.
Aiyagari, S. R. 1989. Gresham’s Law in a lemons market for assets. Canadian
Journal of Economics (August): 686–697.
Barro, R. J. and Stevenson, B. 1997. Do you want that in paper or metal? Wall
Street Journal (November 6).
Bernholz, P. and Gersbach, H. 1992. Gresham’s Law: Theory. New Palgrave
Dictionary of Money and Finance: 286–288. London: Macmillan Press Ltd.
Black, S. W. 1992. Seigniorage. New Palgrave Dictionary of Money and
Finance 438–439. London: Macmillan Press Ltd.
Calvo, G. A., and Rodriguez, C. A. 1977. A model of exchange rate
determination under currency substitution and rational expectations.
Journal of Political Economy: 617–625.
Craig, B. 1996. Competing currencies: Back to the future? Economic
Commentary (October 15). Cleveland: Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland
Fischer, S. 1982. Seigniorage and the case for a national money. Journal of
Political Economy 90: 295–313.
Fell, R. 1992. Crisis and Change: The Maturing of Hong Kong’s Financial
Markets. Far East: Longman Group Ltd.
Freris, A. F. 1991. The Financial Markets of Hong Kong. London: Routledge.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2631567

--- page 16 ---
168 Multinational Finance Journal
Goff, B. L., and Toma, M. 1993. Optimal seigniorage, the gold standard and
central bank financing. Journal of Money Credit and Banking 25: 79–95.
Greenwood, J. G. 1990. An estimate of HK$ currency circulation in
Guangdong province. Asian Monetary Monitor 14(4): 37–44.
Greenwood, J. G. 1995. The debate on the optimum monetary system. Asian
Monetary Monitor 19(2): 1–5.
Hanke, S. H. 1995. Our most profitable export. Forbes (December 4): 126.
Hanke, S. H. and Schuler, K. 1994. Currency Boards for Developing
Countries. San Francisco: San Francisco International Center for Economic
Growth.
Humpage, O. F., and McIntire, J. M. 1995. An introduction to currency boards.
Economic Review 2: 2–12. Cleveland: Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.
Jao, Y. C. 1992. Recent trends in currency substitution. Asian Monetary
Monitor 16(4): 12–21.
Ma, C. 1991. Monetary framework of Macau and its role in the Pearl River
Delta. Working Paper: 2nd International Conference on Asian-Pacific
Financial Markets.
McCloskey, D. M. 1992. Gresham’s Law: History. The New Palgrave
Dictionary of Money and Finance: 286. London: The Macmillan Press Ltd.
McKinnon, R. I. 1982. Currency substitution and instability in the world dollar
standard. American Economic Review 72: 320–323.
Miles, M. A. 1978. Discussion on exchange rates and open economies.
American Economic Review 88: 415–416.
Mills, T. C., and Wood, G. E. 1993. Does the exchange rate regime affect the
economy? Review (July/August): 3–20. St. Louis: Federal Reserve Bank of
St. Louis.
Ogus, S. 1992. Hong Kong dollar currency in Southern China – An updated
estimate. Asian Monetary Monitor: 16(6): 34–35.
Parry, R. T. 1985. Monetary policy in a dynamic global environment. Weekly
Letter (November). San Francisco: Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
Rolnick, A. J., and Weber, W. E. 1986. Gresham’s Law or Gresham’s fallacy?
Journal of Political Economy :185–199.
Scott, R. H. 1995. Money, Financial Markets and the Economy. Singapore:
Prentice Hall.
Sowell, T. 1992. Say’s Law. New Palgrave Dictionary of Money and Finance:
395–397. London: Macmillan Press Ltd.
Tootell, G. M. B. 1992. Purchasing power parity within the United States
(July/August) 16–24. New England Economic Review. Boston: Federal
Reserve Bank of Boston.
Williamson, J. 1995. What Role for Currency Boards 40 (September).
Washington D.C.: Institute for International Economics.
Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=2631567
